Jeremiah 2:13:
“My people . . . have abandoned me,
“the source of living water,
“and dug for themselves . . .
broken cisterns, that cannot hold water.”
Now, we often may think,
‘How is it possible that Jehovah’s people
‘—after all they saw, all they experienced—
could leave Jehovah
and look for wisdom and support elsewhere?’
And yet, it happened over and over again.
Is there a lesson and a warning for us?
Well, yes, there is.
Today, we appreciate so much
all of the spiritual provisions
that we’re receiving from Jehovah
through his organization.
Travel all around the world,
and our brothers and sisters
say they have never felt closer
to Jehovah’s organization than they do now.
We’re receiving life-giving waters
of truth as we never have before.
But even so, just as in Jeremiah’s time,
some of our dear brothers and sisters
are leaving Jehovah or have left Jehovah
and the pure waters of truth
and pursued worthless things.
How can that happen?
How do we make sure
that does not happen to us?
Well, did you notice the point
in our text comment, the first two sentences?
It says this; it says:
“Satan the Devil is intent on neutralizing
“the lifesaving guidance
we receive from Jehovah.
“Moreover, our own ‘treacherous heart’
could interfere with how well
we respond to Jehovah’s directives.”
Now, when I think of the statements
—“treacherous heart”
and ‘how we respond to Jehovah’s directives’—
I cannot help but think of Solomon.
Now, we know Solomon’s account,
how Jehovah blessed him
—gave him everything
he needed to be obedient—
but Solomon ended up losing
his precious record with Jehovah.
He abandoned “the source of living water.”
Now, Solomon started off so well.
What happened to him?
Well, exactly what our text
is talking about here today.
He allowed his treacherous heart to interfere
with Jehovah’s directives.
Now, the directives that Jehovah
gave Solomon were very, very clear.
Look at, for example, Deuteronomy chapter 17.
And as we remember, as the king,
he was supposed to read this law
on a regular basis and write
this law on a regular basis.
Deuteronomy 17:16, 17
—it says: “However, he [in the context,
it’s talking about the king]
should not acquire many horses for himself.”
Verse 17: “Neither should he take
many wives for himself,
“so that his heart may not go astray;
nor should he acquire
vast amounts of silver and gold for himself.”
Do not acquire horses, wives,
vast amounts of silver and gold.
Solomon did all three.
You look at Deuteronomy 7:3, 4,
and there Jehovah says:
‘Do not form marriage alliances
with the nations
because they will lead you astray.’
What did Solomon do?
Well, look over in 1 Kings chapter 11,
and look at verses 1-3.
First Kings 11:1-3—it says:
“But King Solomon loved many foreign women
“besides the daughter of Pharaoh:
“Moabite, Ammonite, Edomite,
Sidonian, and Hittite women.
“They were from the nations
about whom Jehovah said to the Israelites:
“‘You must not go in among them,
“‘and they should not come in among you,
“‘for they will surely incline
your heart to follow their gods.’
“But Solomon clung to them and loved them.
“And he had 700 wives who were princesses
“and 300 concubines,
and his wives gradually inclined his heart”
—just as Jehovah said.
Now, how did this happen?
Solomon did not just fall into sin.
Solomon just didn’t, in a moment of weakness—
He didn’t just wake up one day
and realize, “Oh my word,
I have 700 wives and 300 concubines!”
If he did, Solomon had more problems
than we thought he did.
No, Solomon was an intelligent man.
This was a man who was blessed
by Jehovah with wisdom.
How did he deviate so far?
Well, it was a series of decisions
—one after another—
that differed from Jehovah’s directives
that somehow he was able to explain away,
rationalize away, until he was
completely alienated from Jehovah.
Now, we don’t know
what was going through Solomon’s mind
or how he made those decisions,
but even from our limited perspective,
we can see how that could have happened.
For example, he starts off talking
about the daughter of Pharaoh.
Now, he took the daughter
of Pharaoh as a wife.
But, interestingly, in 1 Kings chapter 3,
it relates how Jehovah granted him
all the wisdom and blessed him.
Well, that was after he had taken
the daughter of Pharaoh as a wife.
So is it possible that Solomon thought,
‘Well, you know, Jehovah still blessed me;
this must mean everything is OK’?
Now, Solomon knew something
wasn’t quite right there
because at 2 Chronicles 8:11,
it says he had
to build another house for her.
She couldn’t live in the house
of David because of the Ark.
It was holy.
She was a foreigner and couldn’t live there.
He knew something wasn’t quite right.
But he was able to make the decision
and rationalize it away anyway.
It says that he loved the Moabite women.
Now, as we know, the Moabites
were enemies of Jehovah, but not all of them.
For example, you may remember
that when David
was on the run from King Saul,
he asked the king of Moab
if he could bring his father and mother
—David’s father and mother—
there, and the king of Moab protected them.
And he did so the whole time that David
was in the stronghold, the account says.
So that means the king of Moab
protected Solomon’s grandparents.
We also remember Ruth.
Well, Ruth
was Solomon’s great-great-grandmother,
and she was a Moabite woman,
and look how well that turned out.
And also men from Moab and Ammon
were part of David’s mighty men.
So they weren’t all bad.
So was it perhaps through David’s mighty men
or maybe from his grandparents,
who stayed in Moab,
that he was introduced
to some of his first wives from Moab?
It talks about Ammonite women.
Well, we remember Solomon’s son Rehoboam,
who later became king.
He was born from an Ammonite woman.
And, interestingly, he was born
before Solomon became king.
So, again, is it possible
that Solomon reasoned:
‘Well, Jehovah is blessing me.
‘I’ve got an Egyptian wife
and an Ammonite wife.
Maybe this doesn’t apply to me
like it does to everybody else.’
What about Sidonians?
Well, we know the Sidonians
were famous for their craftsmanship.
They had outstanding abilities
as loggers and lumbermen.
In fact, Solomon’s father, David,
used the Sidonians to bring lumber
in great quantity for the temple.
Solomon later established contracts
with the Sidonians
to cut trees for the temple.
Well, was it through, possibly,
some of these business relationships
that he first was introduced
to some who became his wives?
Could he have reasoned: ‘Well, you know,
marrying these Sidonian women—
‘Well, that will help ensure
that Jehovah’s house is completed.
This will help me fulfill
my theocratic assignment.’
And just one more:
What about the Hittite women?
Well, we remember Uriah.
David committed adultery with Bath-sheba
and had Uriah put to death.
Bath-sheba became Solomon’s mother.
Uriah was a Hittite
and one of David’s mighty men.
So that means Solomon’s mother
had been married to a Hittite man.
So is it perhaps through Bath-sheba,
through her former in-laws,
or perhaps through others
that Solomon was introduced
to some of his first wives from the Hittites?
Now, we don’t know what Solomon was thinking,
but we can see how it was possible for him
to begin to rationalize
some of those early decisions
until he found himself on a slippery slope,
completely alienated from Jehovah.
So, what’s the lesson for us?
Well, we read this account of Solomon
—accumulating all of those wives,
all of the riches, all of those horses—
and it’s like watching
a car crash in slow motion.
We know exactly where it’s heading,
but Solomon didn’t see it coming.
So the question we have to ask ourselves is,
‘What would the reaction be
‘if somebody was reading
my life story right now
—the decisions that I am making
day to day right now?’
You see, our heart, too, is treacherous.
Our heart will try to cause us
to rationalize away
Jehovah’s clear directives.
Sometimes we may rationalize a decision
because we see we’re still getting
blessings from Jehovah,
or maybe we rationalize
a decision because we see
how it worked out for somebody else
or what somebody else is doing—dangerous.
So, what do we need to do?
Well, we need to do what Solomon said
and should have done himself.
If you turn to Proverbs 3:5,
let’s turn there together, Proverbs 3:5.
It says: “Trust in Jehovah
with all your heart,
and do not rely on your own understanding.”
“Do not rely on your own understanding”
—on our own wisdom.
“Trust in Jehovah”; follow his direction.
And if we do, we can be assured
that we will never abandon
“the source of living water,”
but rather, we’ll benefit
from his guidance for all eternity.